## Contents

- [1. Intro To Modern C++](#1-intro-to-modern-c)
    - [Import](#import)
    - [Namespace](#namespace)
      - [Nested Namespaces are allowed!](#nested-namespaces-are-allowed)
      - [Namespace Alias](#namespace-alias)
    - [Functions](#functions)
      - [Function Overloading](#function-overloading)
      - [Default Parameters/Arguments](#default-parametersarguments)
    - [Dynamic Memory Allocation](#dynamic-memory-allocation)


# 1. Intro To Modern C++
The C++ language is often viewed as a _“better C”_

---
### Import
Starting with **C++23**, you can get access to the entire C++ Standard Library by importing a single standard named module called _**`std`**_. 
Notice that when importing the named module std, you don’t use angle brackets, but when importing individual header files, you need to use angle brackets as follows:
``` C++
import std;
import <print>;
```
> :grey_exclamation: If your compiler does not yet support modules, then instead of importing modules or header files, you need to **`#include`** header files.

> :grey_exclamation: Keep in mind that **_`endl`_** inserts a new line into the stream and flushes everything currently in its buffers down the chute. Overusing endl, for example in a loop, is not recommended because it will have a performance impact. On the other hand, inserting **`\n`** into the stream also inserts a new line but does not automatically flush the buffer.
---
### Namespace
Namespaces address the problem of **naming conflicts between different pieces of code**. ... As the compiler has no way of knowing which version of function you are referring to within your code. There are two ways of using namespaces:
``` C++
namespace mycode {
void foo()
  {
  std::cout << "foo() called in the mycode namespace";
  }
}
```
1. Prepend the namespace onto the function name by using **`::`**, also called the scope resolution operator. **(Recommended Way!)**
``` C++
mycode::foo(); // Calls the "foo" function in the "mycode" namespace
```
2. **_`using`_** directive, but beware of overusing this shortcut. Name conflicts will again result if you are using two namespaces that contain the same names.
``` C++
using namespace mycode;
int main()
{
  foo(); // Implies mycode::foo();
}
```
> :grey_exclamation: The main() function must never be put in a namespace. It must be in the global namespace.

> :exclamation: Never put a **_`using`_** directive or **_`using`_** declaration in a header file at global scope!
#### Nested Namespaces are allowed!
#### Namespace Alias
Can be used to give a new and possibly shorter name to another namespace.
``` C++
namespace MyFTP = MyLibraries::Networking::FTP; 
```

> :grey_exclamation: `sizeof()` cannot be done for namespaces or function names!

--- 
### Functions
...

#### Function Overloading

#### Default Parameters/Arguments
A feature similar to function overloading in C++ is default arguments. You can specify defaults for function parameters in the prototype ... 

**You can only provide defaults for a continuous list of parameters starting from the rightmost parameter**. Otherwise, the compiler will not be able to match missing arguments to
default arguments.

> :exclamation: You must specify the default arguments **only** in the function declaration, but not in the definition.

> :exclamation: Anything you can do with default arguments, you can do with function overloading. You could write three different constructors, each of which takes a different number of arguments. However, **default arguments allow you to write just one constructor that can take three different number of arguments.** You should use the mechanism with which you are most comfortable.

``` C++
// void printValue();   --> You can't do this!
void printValue(int x);
void printValue(int x, int y);
void printValue(int x = 20, int y = 15, int z = 0);
```

---
### Dynamic Memory Allocation

|   new  	| malloc 	|
|:------:	|:------:	|
|  **`operator`**  	|   **`function`**  	|
| **-** 	|  **-**  	|
